Feature blog 1.33: Userns enabled by default (#49983)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/XX-userns-enabled-by-default/index.md

stack requirements are met, pods can opt-in to use user namespaces. There is no need to enable any
Kubernetes feature flag anymore!

Before we deep dive, let's recap what user namespaces are and why they are important.

## What is a user namespace?

Note: Linux user namespaces are a different concept from [Kubernetes
namespaces](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).
The former is a Linux kernel feature; the latter is a Kubernetes feature.

Linux provides different namespaces to isolate processes from each other. For
example, a typical Kubernetes pod runs within a network namespace to isolate the
network identity and a PID namespace to isolate the processes.

One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user
namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). It
isolates the UIDs and GIDs of the containers from the ones on the host. The
identifiers in the container can be mapped to identifiers on the host in a way
where the host UID/GIDs used for different containers never overlap.
Furthermore, the identifiers can be mapped to unprivileged, non-overlapping UIDs

> and GIDs on the host. This brings two key benefits:

Reviewer: what do you think about adding this other key benefit (so three key benefits)?

On top of the two you've mentioned, I'd add:

```
_Enablement of new use cases_: User namespaces allow containers to gain certain capabilities inside their own user namespace without affecting the host. This unlocks new possibilities, such as running applications that require privileged operations without granting full root access on the host. This is particularly useful for running nested containers.
```

Author: Great idea, thanks! Adding it now :)

movement**. This is guaranteed with user-namespaces (the kubelet chooses it for
you). In the same talk, Greg and Vinayak show how to achieve the same without
user namespaces we went through a quite complex solution. This part [starts in
this minute][kubecon-nonroot-uids].

 * **The capabilities granted are only granted inside the user-namespace**. That
 means that if a pod breaks out of the container, they are not valid on the
host. We can't provide that without user namespaces.

 * **It enables new use-cases in a _secure_ way**. You can run docker in docker,
unprivileged container builds, Kubernetes inside Kubernetes, etc all **in a secure
way**. Most of the previous solutions to do this required privileged containers or
putting the node at a high risk of compromise.

[kubecon-nonroot-pains]: https://youtu.be/uouH9fsWVIE?feature=shared&t=351
[kubecon-nonroot-uids]: https://youtu.be/uouH9fsWVIE?feature=shared&t=793

8. Is there container runtime documentation for user namespaces?

Yes, we have:
 * [containerd
   documentation](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/b22a302a75d9a7d7955780e54cc5b32de6c8525d/docs/user-namespaces)

>  * CRI-O documentation // TODO: does crio have userns documentation?

Author: @giuseppe @saschagrunert is there CRIO documentation on userns? I only found about the annotation, that is not what we are talking about here.

Reviewer: I am not aware of any, the annotation is a CRI-O specific thing so that was worth documenting, but user namespace support through CRI happens transparently and there is nothing to configure

Author: Thanks, I'll just mention that, then :)

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.33: User Namespaces enabled by default!"

> date: XXXX-XX-XX

Reviewer 2: While this blog is about the v1.33 release, we will limit to one blog published per day. This means it is likely that this blog will be planned on a later date, and the schedule is yet to be fully decided. (It is highly dependent on other blog reviews completed in time)

If you can simply add `draft: true` in the front matter, it would allow us to merge the blog without actually publishing them to the website. Once the blog content is finalised and merged, the Release Comms team can take over the rest of the publication setup.

```suggestion
date: 2025-04-23
draft: true
```

You can find more in the blog guideline [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/blog/article-submission/#article-scheduling)! 👍

slug: userns-enabled-by-default
author: >
  Rodrigo Campos Catelin (Microsoft),
  Giuseppe Scrivano (Red Hat),
  Sascha Grunert (Red Hat)
---

In Kubernetes 1.33 support for user namespaces is enabled by default. This means
that, when the stack requirements are met, pods can opt-in to use user
namespaces. There is no need to enable any Kubernetes feature flag anymore!

In this blog post we answer some common questions about user namespaces. But,
before we dive into that, let's recap what user namespaces are and why they are
important.

## What is a user namespace?

Note: Linux user namespaces are a different concept from [Kubernetes
namespaces](/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/namespaces/).
The former is a Linux kernel feature; the latter is a Kubernetes feature.

Linux provides different namespaces to isolate processes from each other. For
example, a typical Kubernetes pod runs within a network namespace to isolate the
network identity and a PID namespace to isolate the processes.

> One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user
> namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). It
> isolates the UIDs and GIDs of the containers from the ones on the host. The
> identifiers in the container can be mapped to identifiers on the host in a way
> where the host UID/GIDs used for different containers never overlap.

Reviewer 2: Rephrased slightly for possibly better flow

```suggestion
One Linux namespace that was left behind is the [user
namespace](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/user_namespaces.7.html). It
isolates the UIDs and GIDs of the containers from the ones on the host. The
identifiers in a container can be mapped to identifiers on the host in a way
where host and container(s) never end up in overlapping UIDs/GIDs.
```

Author: Isn't this saying that the container IDs don't overlap with the host? This is not what I'm saying, the text is also saying that the IDs used for containers do not overlap.

Reviewer 2: Sorry I thought the idea was the ability to have entirely distinct set of UIDs/GIDs for both host and containers, if you wish. I'm not 100% clear what this is trying to say, is this so that containers have distinct set of UIDs/GIDs from host perspective? If that's the case, what about something like "... where host UIDs/GIDs associated with container(s) do not overlap with each other"?

runs as root inside the container, it has no privileges on the host. This
greatly protects what host files it can read/write, which process it can send
signals to, etc. Furthermore, capabilities granted are only valid inside the
user namespace and not on the host, limiting the impact a container
escape can have.

 * _Enablement of new use cases_: User namespaces allow containers to gain
certain capabilities inside their own user namespace without affecting the host.
This unlocks new possibilities, such as running applications that require
privileged operations without granting full root access on the host. This is
particularly useful for running nested containers.

{{< figure src="/images/blog/2024-04-22-userns-beta/image.svg" alt="Image showing IDs 0-65535 are reserved to the host, pods use higher IDs" title="User namespace IDs allocation" class="diagram-medium" >}}

Without using a user namespace, a container running as root in the case of a
container breakout has root privileges on the node. If some capabilities
were granted to the container, the capabilities are valid on the host too. None
of this is true when using user namespaces (modulo bugs, of course 🙂).

## Demos

> Rodrigo created some demos, to see how some CVEs are mitigated when user

Reviewer 3: Duplicate word "some", how about:
```suggestion
Rodrigo created demos to understand how some CVEs are mitigated when user
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

namespaces are used. We showed them here before, but take a look if you haven't:

Mitigation of CVE 2024-21626 with user namespaces:

{{< youtube id="07y5bl5UDdA" title="Mitigation of CVE-2024-21626 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace support" class="youtube-quote-sm" >}}

Mitigation of CVE 2022-0492 with user namespaces:

{{< youtube id="M4a2b4KkXN8" title="Mitigation of CVE-2022-0492 on Kubernetes by enabling User Namespace support" class="youtube-quote-sm" >}}

> ## Everything you wanted to know about user namespaces in kubernetes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Everything you wanted to know about user namespaces in Kubernetes
```

Here we try to answer some of the questions we have been asked about user
namespaces support in Kubernetes.

**1. What are the requirements to use it?**

The requirements are documented [here][userns-req]. But we will elaborate a bit
more, in the following questions.

> [userns-req]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#before-you-begin

Reviewer 3: I think you can just link to the file itself:
```suggestion
[userns-req]: /docs/concepts/workloads/pods/user-namespaces/#before-you-begin
```

Author: Fixed this and all ocurrences. Thanks!

> **2. What is idmap mounts and why the file-systems used need to support it?**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**2. What are idmap mounts and why the file-systems used need to support it?**
```

> Idmap mounts is a Linux kernel feature that uses a mapping of UID/GIDs when
> accessing a mount. When combined with user namespaces, it greatly simplifies the
> support for volumes, as you can forget about the host UID/GIDs the user
> namespace is using.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Idmap mounts are a Linux kernel feature that uses a mapping of UIDs/GIDs when
accessing a mount. When combined with user namespaces, it greatly simplifies the
support for volumes, as you can forget about the host UIDs/GIDs the user
namespace is using.
```

In particular, thanks to idmap mounts we can:
 * Run each pod with different UIDs/GIDs on the host. This is key for the
   lateral movement prevention we mentioned earlier.
 * Share volumes with pods that don't use user namespaces.
 * Enable/disable user namespaces without needing to chown the pod's volumes.

> However, support for idmap mounts in the kernel is not black/white. The support
> is per file-system and support was added over time to different file-systems.

Reviewer 2: I find this sentence a bit redundant, but am not sure what this sentence actually meant... Something like following?

```suggestion
However, support for idmap mounts in the kernel can be confusing. It
has been added over time to different file-systems, and their maturity can differ.
```

Author: No. Their maturity doesn't differ and it's not confusing.

My point here is: is **not** that a given kernel version supports idmap mounts or not. A given kernel version **and** file-system can support idmap mounts or not. Support is per file-system.

Author: I've just changed it to sentence that goes straight to the point:

```
Support for idmap mounts in the kernel is per file-system and different kernel releases added support for idmap mounts on different file-systems.
```

I hope this is clear for you. Otherwise please feel free to re-open.

Reviewer 2: Thanks that reads better indeed!

> You can check which kernel version added support for each file-system in the
> `mount_setattr` man page, or checking the online version of it [here][mount_setattr].

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like this would read better?

```suggestion
To find which kernel version added support for each file-system, you can check out the
`mount_setattr` man page, or the online version of it [here][mount_setattr].
```

> Most popular file-systems are supported in some kernel version, the notable
> absence that isn't supported yet is NFS.

Reviewer 2: Did you really mean "some" kernel version? Or something like below could be better?

```suggestion
You can find most popular file-systems are supported in recent kernel versions. One of the most notable
absence here is NFS, which isn't supported yet as of writing.
```

Author: recent is not accurate, if you check the link you will see that a lot of file-systems are supported since 5.12 that was released ~4 years ago

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the clarification! In that case, I still think it's misleading to say "in some kernel version", because it's not just about one version. Recent may be a bit misleading indeed, so it may be better to be more specific, with something like "You can find most popular file-systems have been supported in kernel versions from as early as 5.12"?

Author: I don't see it unclear, as just a few lines above we explained that support for different fs was added in different kernel releases. But that is my way of reading it, I might be biased because I wrote the text.

Given that we already explained that support is per file-system in this same question, a few lines above, I think it is simpler to just say:

```
Most popular file-systems are supported, the notable absence that isn't supported yet is NFS
```

Changed to that. But feel free to re-open if it isn't clear for you

[mount_setattr]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mount_setattr.2.html#NOTES

**3. Can you clarify exactly which file-systems need to support idmap mounts?**

The file-systems that need to support idmap mounts are all the file-systems used
by a pod in the `pod.spec.volumes` field.

This means: for PV/PVC volumes, the file-system used in the PV needs to support
idmap mounts; for hostPath volumes, the file-system used in the hostPath
needs to support idmap mounts.

What does this mean for secrets/configmaps/projected/downwardAPI volumes? For
these volumes, the kubelet creates a `tmpfs` file-system. So, you will need a
6.3 kernel to use these volumess (note that if you use them as env variables it
is fine).

> And what about emptyDir volumes? Those volumes are created by the Kubelet by
> default in `/var/lib/kubelet/pods/`. You can also use a custom directory for
> this. But what needs to support idmap mounts is the file-system used in that
> directory.

Reviewer 2: I think you don't capitalise kubelet

```suggestion
And what about emptyDir volumes? Those volumes are created by the kubelet by
default in `/var/lib/kubelet/pods/`. You can also use a custom directory for
this. But what needs to support idmap mounts is the file-system used in that
directory.
```

The kubelet creates some more files for the container, like `/etc/hostname`,
`/etc/resolv.conf`, `/dev/termination-log`, `/etc/hosts`, etc. These files are
also created in `/var/lib/kubelet/pods/` by default, so it's important for the
file-system used in that directory to support idmap mounts.

Also, some container runtimes may put some of these ephemeral volumes inside a
`tmpfs` file-system, in which case you will need support for idmap mounts in
`tmpfs`.

**4. Can I use a kernel older than 6.3?**

Yes, but you will need to make sure you are not using a `tmpfs` file-system. If
you avoid that, you can easily use 5.19 (if all the other file-systems you use
support idmap mounts in that kernel).

> To avoid using `tmpfs` can be tricky, though, as we just mentioned. But besides
> having to avoid those volume types, you will also have to avoid mounting the
> service account token. Every pod have it mounted by default, and it is using a
> projected volume that, as we mentioned, uses a `tmpfs` file-system.

Reviewer 2: Some grammar fix, as well as slight rewording

```suggestion
It can be tricky to avoid using `tmpfs`, though, as we just described above. 
Besides having to avoid those volume types, you will also have to avoid mounting the
service account token. Every pod has it mounted by default, and it uses a
projected volume that, as we mentioned, uses a `tmpfs` file-system.
```

> You can even go lower than 5.19, all the way to 5.12. However, your container
> rootfs is probably using an overlayfs file-system, and support for overlayfs was
> added in 5.19. We wouldn't recommend to use a kernel older than 5.19, as not
> being able to use idmap mounts for the rootfs is a big limitation. If you
> absolutely need to, you can check [this blog post][userns-tricks] Rodrigo wrote
> some years ago, about tricks to use user-namespaces when you we can't support
> idmap mounts on the rootfs.

Reviewer 2: As this isn't something we would recommend, we could tone down a bit?

```suggestion
You could even go lower than 5.19, all the way to 5.12. However, your container
rootfs probably uses an overlayfs file-system, and support for overlayfs was
added in 5.19. We wouldn't recommend to use a kernel older than 5.19, as not
being able to use idmap mounts for the rootfs is a big limitation. If you
absolutely need to, you can check [this blog post][userns-tricks] Rodrigo wrote
some years ago, about tricks to use user namespaces when you can't support
idmap mounts on the rootfs.
```

I'd also like to update the "some years ago" to note which year exactly it was for future readers who read this much later.

[userns-tricks]: https://kinvolk.io/blog/2023/11/tips-and-tricks-for-user-namespaces-with-kubernetes-and-containerd

**5. If my stack supports user namespaces, do I need to configure anything else?**

No, if your stack supports it and you are using Kubernetes 1.33, there is
nothing you need to configure. You should be able to follow the task: [Use a
user namespace with a pod][task-userns].

However, there are some configuration you can do, you can check them
[here][userns-k8s-conf]. You can also enable a [feature gate to relax the PSS

> rules][userns-pss].

Reviewer 2: I found this part quite confusing -- you start off saying there is nothing needed. But then you tell me otherwise right after. I think it may be more friendly to start with something like "No, as long as you do not have peculiar requirements, you just need to use Kubernetes v1.33 to use user namespaces" -- and then follow up with some sample cases where configuration could be helpful?

Author: What is confusing exactly of that? Nothing is _needed_ for it to work, however there are configurations you _can_ change, but it's not required to set any configuration before using userns.

How would you say that?

Reviewer 2: It's not that the content is confusing, but it sounds like you are contradicting yourself (you are surely not, but just in terms of the flow).

Maybe phrase it with something like "No, there is nothing needed to be configured ...
In case you have specific requirements, you may configure with various options. You can find more in..." ?

Author: Perfect, that is also better!

Thanks for all the comments, not just this, it read better now :)

Applied that and pushed now!

**6. The demos are nice, but are there more CVEs that this mitigates?**

Yes, quite a lot, actually! Besides the ones in the demo, the KEP has [more CVEs
you can check][kep-cve]. That list is not exhaustive, there are many more.

[kep-cve]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/b8013bfbceb16843686aebbb2ccffce81a6e772d/keps/sig-node/127-user-namespaces/README.md#motivation

**7. Can you sum up why user namespaces is important?**

Think about running a process as root, maybe even an untrusted process. Do you
think that is secure? What if we limit it by adding seccomp and apparmor, mask
some files in /proc (so it can't crash the node, etc.) and some more tweaks?

Wouldn't it be better if we don't give it privileges in the first place, instead
of trying to play whack-a-mole with all the possible ways root can escape?

This is what user namespaces does, plus some other goodies:

 * **Run as an unprivileged user on the host without making changes to your application**.
Greg and Vinayak did a great talk on the pains you can face when trying to run
unprivileged without user namespaces. The pains part [starts in this minute][kubecon-nonroot-pains].

>  * **All pods run with different UIDs/GIDs, we significantly improve the lateral
> movement**. This is guaranteed with user-namespaces (the kubelet chooses it for
> you). In the same talk, Greg and Vinayak show that to achieve the same without
> user namespaces, they went through a quite complex custom solution. This part
> [starts in this minute][kubecon-nonroot-uids].

Reviewer 2: For consistency

```suggestion
 * **All pods run with different UIDs/GIDs, we significantly improve the lateral
movement**. This is guaranteed with user namespaces (the kubelet chooses it for
you). In the same talk, Greg and Vinayak show that to achieve the same without
user namespaces, they went through a quite complex custom solution. This part
[starts in this minute][kubecon-nonroot-uids].
```

>  * **The capabilities granted are only granted inside the user-namespace**. That
>  means that if a pod breaks out of the container, they are not valid on the
> host. We can't provide that without user namespaces.

Reviewer 2: For consistency

```suggestion
 * **The capabilities granted are only granted inside the user namespace**. That
 means that if a pod breaks out of the container, they are not valid on the
host. We can't provide that without user namespaces.
```

 * **It enables new use-cases in a _secure_ way**. You can run docker in docker,
unprivileged container builds, Kubernetes inside Kubernetes, etc all **in a secure
way**. Most of the previous solutions to do this required privileged containers or
putting the node at a high risk of compromise.

[kubecon-nonroot-pains]: https://youtu.be/uouH9fsWVIE?feature=shared&t=351
[kubecon-nonroot-uids]: https://youtu.be/uouH9fsWVIE?feature=shared&t=793

**8. Is there container runtime documentation for user namespaces?**

> Yes, we have [containerd
> documentation](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/b22a302a75d9a7d7955780e54cc5b32de6c8525d/docs/user-namespaces).
> This explains different limitations of containerd 1.7 and how to use
> user-namespaces in containerd without Kubernetes pods (using `ctr`). Note that
> if you use containerd, you need containerd 2.0 or higher to use user-namespaces
> with Kubernetes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Yes, we have [containerd
documentation](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/tree/b22a302a75d9a7d7955780e54cc5b32de6c8525d/docs/user-namespaces).
This explains different limitations of containerd 1.7 and how to use
user namespaces in containerd without Kubernetes pods (using `ctr`). Note that
if you use containerd, you need containerd 2.0 or higher to use user namespaces
with Kubernetes.
```

CRI-O doesn't have special documentation for user namespaces, it works out of
the box.

**9. What about the other container runtimes?**

> No other container runtime that we are aware of supports user-namespaces with
> Kubernetes. That sadly includes [cri-dockerd][cri-dockerd] too.

Reviewer 2: For consistency

```suggestion
No other container runtime that we are aware of supports user namespaces with
Kubernetes. That sadly includes [cri-dockerd][cri-dockerd] too.
```

[cri-dockerd]: https://github.com/Mirantis/cri-dockerd/issues/74

**10. I'd like to learn more about it, what would you recommend?**

Rodrigo did an introduction to user namespaces at KubeCon 2022:
 * [Run As “Root”, Not Root: User Namespaces In K8s- Marga Manterola, Isovalent & Rodrigo Campos Catelin](https://sched.co/182K0)

> Also, this presentation at Kubecon 2023, that we mentioned earlier, can be
> useful as a motivation for user namespaces:

Reviewer 2: Correcting KubeCon casing, and simplifying the sentecne a bit

```suggestion
Also, this aforementioned presentation at KubeCon 2023 can be
useful as a motivation for user namespaces:
```

 * [Least Privilege Containers: Keeping a Bad Day from Getting Worse - Greg Castle & Vinayak Goyal](https://sched.co/1HyX4)

Bear in mind the presentation are some years old, some things have changed since
then. Use the Kubernetes documentation as the source of truth.

If you would like to learn more about the low-level details of user namespaces,
you can check `man 7 user_namespaces` and `man 1 unshare`. You can easily create
namespaces and experiment with how they behave. Be aware that the `unshare` tool
has a lot of flexibility, and with that options to create incomplete setups.

If you would like to know more about idmap mounts, you can check [its Linux
kernel documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/filesystems/idmappings.html).

## Conclusions

Running pods as root is not ideal and running them as non-root is also hard
with containers, as it can require a lot of changes to the applications.

> User-namespaces is a unique feature to let you have the best of both worlds: run
> as non-root, without any changes to your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User namespaces are a unique feature to let you have the best of both worlds: run
as non-root, without any changes to your application.
```

> This post covered: what are user-namespaces, why they are important, some real
> world examples of CVEs mitigated by user-namespaces, and some common questions.
> Hopefully, this post helped you to eliminate the last doubts you had and you
> will now try user-namespaces (if you didn't already!).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This post covered: what are user namespaces, why they are important, some real
world examples of CVEs mitigated by user-namespaces, and some common questions.
Hopefully, this post helped you to eliminate the last doubts you had and you
will now try user-namespaces (if you didn't already!).
```
